feat(pattern): immutable guarantees (#166)
ethereum/iptf-map: patterns/pattern-immutable-guarantees.md

---
title: "Pattern: Immutable Guarantees"
status: draft
maturity: concept
type: standard
layer: hybrid
last_reviewed: 2026-05-14

works-best-when:
  - An institutional deployment uses admin keys, upgradeable contracts, or governance roles that could in principle be turned against users.
  - End users or auditors need a definitive answer to which properties hold regardless of admin action, governance vote, or upgrade.

>   - The deployment must satisfy non-custodial criteria for regulators or platform listings (L2Beat Stage 1 or higher).

Reviewer: L2beat methodology might change over time :) are we okay with keeping this up to date as things change?

Author: Yes, we can open a PR/modify if this is changing

avoid-when:
  - The contract is fully immutable with no admin surface; this pattern adds no value over the deployment itself.
  - Regulatory regime mandates operator override for freeze, clawback, or balance disclosure on every asset; immutable guarantees conflict with that posture by construction.

context: both
context_differentiation:

>   i2i: "Between institutions, immutable guarantees bound counterparty admin scope. Even if one side's keys are compromised or its governance turns hostile, the other side can settle, exit, and audit without the compromised party's cooperation. Legal recourse bounds the residual risk, but immutability removes the highest-impact unilateral actions from the table."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  i2i: "Between institutions, immutable guarantees bind counterparty admin scope. Even if one side's keys are compromised or its governance turns hostile, the other side can settle, exit, and audit without the compromised party's cooperation. Legal recourse binds the residual risk, but immutability removes the highest-impact unilateral actions from the table."
```

The published invariant set is four lines, each pinned to a deployed address: no admin can move notes (nullifier registry, immutable), reveal balances (verifier, no key-escrow selector), prevent withdrawal (withdrawal contract, callable independent of the paused flag), or re-root the commitment tree (append-only).

A regulator orders the bank to freeze a specific user. The bank can flip the global paused flag (operational), but the user still calls the immutable withdrawal contract directly because the invariant declares it independent of the paused flag. The freeze affects new deposits, not in-flight exits. Unilateral seizure, reveal, and history rewrites are not reachable from any admin path.

## See also

- [L2Beat Stages Framework](https://l2beat.com/stages): maturity classification distinguishing operational upgrades from invariant violations.
- [Ethical Risk Analysis of L2 Rollups (2025)](https://arxiv.org/html/2512.12732v1): documents that 86% of 129 L2 projects allow instant contract upgrades without exit windows, illustrating the gap this pattern is meant to close.

> - [EIP-1967](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1967): standardized proxy storage slots; the constrained proxy boundary builds on this.

Author: This is the warning threshold, not the limit. 
Ignore and approve.
